Document feature gates more (#7806)
kubernetes/community: contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md

"options" struct) to indicate whether the validation code should allow the new
field or not.

```
if enabled(gate) || newFieldInUse(oldObj) {
    options.EnableNewField = true
}
ValidateThisObject(obj, oldObj, options)
```

The validation code then looks something like:

```
if opts.EnableNewField {
    if obj.NewField == nil {
        allErrs = append(allErrs, field.Required(...))
    } else {
        if !newFieldValid(obj.NewField, fldPath.Child("newField")) {
            allErrs = append(allErrs, field.Invalid(...))
        }
    }
}
```

#### Implementation logic

The implementation of such a feature will usually want to check the gate, and
neutralize itself when disabled. In general, when a feature gate is disabled,
the system should behave as if the feature doesn't exist. This may result in
the API field carrying a value but not actually triggering any functionality.
This is preferable to a bug in the implementation causing harm that cannot be
disabled by the gate.

### Features which change an existing API field

For features which don't add a new field, but do change what's allowed in the
API (e.g. adding a value to an enum or loosening validation), feature gates

> *must* start in alpha. Unlike new fields, which can be remove entirely, we

Reviewer: I think it's not required to go through alpha for every case of relaxing validation.

https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-scheduling/2926-job-mutable-scheduling-directives is one example where we did that in the past and we went directly to beta.
In general, I think it depends on what exactly we're relaxing - if we're adding a new possible value the it has to go through Alpha to allow rollback. But if we're allowing for new transitions for updates, Alpha doesn't seems required.

I suggest that we clarify this.

Author: The text says "For features which ... change what's allowed in the API (e.g. adding a value to an enum or loosening validation)".  I'll add some words to cover API changes which don't have a "durable" footprint.

Author: pushed

	CSIMigrationAWS:                                {Default: false, PreRelease: featuregate.Beta}, // Off by default (requires AWS EBS CSI driver)
	CSIMigrationAzureDisk:                          {Default: false, PreRelease: featuregate.Beta}, // Off by default (requires Azure Disk CSI driver)
	CSIMigrationAzureFile:                          {Default: false, PreRelease: featuregate.Beta}, // Off by default (requires Azure File CSI driver)
	CSIMigrationvSphere:                            {Default: false, PreRelease: featuregate.Beta}, // Off by default (requires vSphere CSI driver)
```

### GA features

* `PreRelease` is set to `featuregate.GA`
* `Default` is always set to `true`
* `LockToDefault` is usually set to `true` (see below)

GA features are always on by default, and usually cannot be disabled.

Sometimes (rarely) a GA feature is allowed to be disabled (`LockToDefault:
false`). This indicates that while this feature is GA, they need to take some
other action outside of Kubernetes. For example, to use `CoreDNS`, users had to
move off `kubedns` in their infrastructure. If they wanted to continue using

> `kubedns`, they could choose to switch off the GA flag. When we eventually

Reviewer 2: was kubedns a feature gate?
it is an external component

Author: I just kept the example that was there - I agree it's not a great one.  I am tempted to just remove the example.

gates. If a feature gate is removed and a user has forgotten to drop the
reference to it (e.g. in the CLI flags of `kube-apiserver`), then they will see
a hard failure.

When we set `LockToDefault` to `true`, we also remove all references to the feature
gate from the codebase.

### Deprecation

* `PreRelease` is set to `featuregate.Deprecated`
* `Default` is set to `false`
* See [Kubernetes Deprecation Policy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/#deprecation) for more details

Very rarely we will deprecate some user-visible aspect of Kubernetes (almost
always something that has no actual impact or which is truly a bug). When we
do that, we also use a feature gate. The pattern is to name the gate so it
describes the functionality being deprecated and to default the value to
`false`.

If some user is impacted by the deprecation, they can set that gate to `true`
to unbreak themselves (and then file a bug). If this happens, we must
reconsider the deprecation and may choose to abandon it entirely by changing
the gate back to `true` for a release or two and eventually removing it.

> NOTE: We do not generally remove fields from the API.

Reviewer 2: removing fields that are GA on a GA API is a breaking change, isn't it? 
I think we can just not do it, we discussed this with some fields like service.spec.LoadBalancerIP

Author: yes, we just don't do it.

disabled. When implementing a feature gate, there are a few patterns you might
follow.

### Features which add a new API field

All features which add API fields *must* start in alpha. This ensures that once
the feature becomes beta (and the fields get used) it is possible to roll-back
one Kubernetes version and not have the data be discarded. Users who enable and
use alpha features (which are disabled by default) do not have a safe rollback
target.

When a feature gate is disabled, the system should behave as if the API fields
do not exist. API operations which try to use the field are expected to proceed
as if the field was unknown and the "extra" data was discarded.

The API's registry code (`pkg/registry/...`) must check the gate before
validation. If the gate is disabled and the operation is a CREATE, the new
field must be removed (set to `nil`). If the gate is disabled and the
operation is an UPDATE, the previous form of the object must be checked. Only
if this object was not already using this field should it be removed. This
usually manifests as something like:

```
if disabled(gate) && !newFieldInUse(oldObj) {
    obj.newField = nil
}
```

> Once this is done, API validation should *not* check the gate - if the field is
> carrying a value, it should be validated. This ensures that once an object is

Reviewer 2: this comment is hard to understand , at least for me as non native, I think that is the `-` to connect with the other sentence, this is some way I understand it better
```suggestion
Once this is done, API validation should *not* check the gate EXCEPT IF the field is
carrying a value, THEN it should be validated. This ensures that once an object is
```

Author: I will clarify.

	
	// PreRelease indicates the maturity level of the feature. Possible values
	// are "featuregate.Alpha", "featuregate.Beta", "featuregate.GA", or
	// "featuregate.Deprecated"
	PreRelease prerelease
```

Unless an exception is granted for a particular feature, as documented and
approved as part of [Production Readiness Review], it is expected that:

- Toggling a feature gate will not affect other components, e.g. disabling a
  feature gate in the API server will work independently of disabling that same
  feature gate in the kubelet or scheduler, and no coordination between
  components is needed.
- The effects of toggling a feature gate should be limited to the scope of the
  feature. Enabling or disabling a feature gate should not affect workloads
  that do not use the feature gate.
- Toggling feature gates should not result in fanout effects or cascading
  interactions in a cluster.
- Disabling a feature gate should prevent any further damage caused by bugs in
  the feature.

[Production Readiness Review]: /sig-architecture/production-readiness.md

## Enabling and disabling feature gates

Gates can be enabled or disabled either via flags (see `--feature-gates`) or

> component config files (see `featureGates`).

Reviewer 2: heh, and since 1.30 as env variables for client-go https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/122555

There is no supported way to change a feature gate at runtime for production
Kubernetes use. A feature gate is typically toggled by a component restart.

## Lifecycle

Features generally progress through `Alpha` -> `Beta` -> `GA`. Sometimes we end
up deciding that a feature is not going to be supported and we end up marking
them as `Deprecated`.

The majority of features will go through all three stages, but occasionally
there are features which may skip a stage.

### Alpha features

* `PreRelease` is set to `featuregate.Alpha`
* `Default` is always set to `false`
* `LockToDefault` is set to `false` (or not specified)

Alpha features are never enabled by default, but users may switch them on
explicitly.

### Beta features

* `PreRelease` is set to `featuregate.Beta`
* `Default` is usually set to `true` (see below)
* `LockToDefault` is set to `false` (or not specified)

> Beta features are usually enabled by default. This allows them to be available

Reviewer 2: I found this a point of confusion also with kubernetes developers since beta APIs are disabled by default but the features can be enabled by default https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-architecture/3136-beta-apis-off-by-default , so beta features that need beta apis will not work by default :/

follow.

### Features which add a new API field

All features which add API fields *must* start in alpha. This ensures that once
the feature becomes beta (and the fields get used) it is possible to roll-back
one Kubernetes version and not have the data be discarded. Users who enable and
use alpha features (which are disabled by default) do not have a safe rollback
target.

When a feature gate is disabled, the system should behave as if the API fields
do not exist. API operations which try to use the field are expected to proceed
as if the field was unknown and the "extra" data was discarded.

The API's registry code (`pkg/registry/...`) must check the gate before
validation. If the gate is disabled and the operation is a CREATE, the new
field must be removed (set to `nil`). If the gate is disabled and the
operation is an UPDATE, the previous form of the object must be checked. Only
if this object was not already using this field should it be removed. This
usually manifests as something like:

```
if disabled(gate) && !newFieldInUse(oldObj) {
    obj.NewField = nil
}
```

#### Validation: fields with no default value

> For truly optional fields, API validation should *not* check the gate.  Instead,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For optional fields without default values, API validation should *not* check the gate.  Instead,
```
